>>To enter the Tao and
experience enlightenment is
to answer the question,
what was your original face
before your mother
and father were born?
What is immortality?
Is the promise of everlasting
life merely an illusion
created to shield you from
the truth about death,
or is there proof that
immortality is real?
What secrets are hidden in
spiritual traditions about life
after death?
You can achieve
the ultimate dream.
You can unlock the secret
to who you really are.
You can open the hidden door to
discover the genius within you.
You can achieve
enlightenment and realize
your ultimate potential.
For thousands of years,
the spiritual quest
of the human race
has been to discover
the true self-- the eternal
light of the Kundalini.
At last, from the wisdom
of enlightened teachers,
you will discover
your true nature,
which is far more powerful
than you have ever imagined.
You will experience
total inner illumination.
>>The ordinary reality,
every day stuff
that we go through,
good, bad or indifferent,
is of extreme value.
It's like gold.
It is jewels.
But only through
spiritual practice
do you develop the sensitivity,
which is actually innate.
So it's more like bringing
out the sensitivity
to know that this moment
is the only moment you're
going to get, and it's going
to be wide open, luminous
and blissful.
>>You have the ability to
master spiritual alchemy
and achieve enlightenment.
Early historical records show
that man has searched almost
endlessly for the
secret of immortality.
The first people who studied
the natural world around them
became known as alchemists.
They experimented with
animals, plants and minerals.
Their work and
observations eventually
led to the creation
of chemistry, physics
and medicine.
Eastern alchemists
searched for immortality
through the study of meditation,
yoga and the martial arts.
They believed immortality
could be achieved
by recreating conception
within their own bodies
through diligent practice.
Many Western alchemists
believed there
was a secret formula that could
turn base metals into gold.
This Philosopher's
Stone was also
thought to be an elixir
of immortality that
could rejuvenate the body.
They believed if it could
turn a corruptible metal
to incorruptible gold,
it would certainly
be able to transform
human beings
from mortals to immortals.
The goal of the early alchemists
was described in Latin
as finding the secret method
to unite the soul, called
the anima, with the spiritus,
or spirit, within the corpus,
or physical body.
This is believed to represent
the original trinity which
underlies Christianity,
Buddhism, Darwinism,
many other ancient
alchemical sciences.
Every human being
has the potential
to fully master
spiritual alchemy.
>>Because if you only learn
the practice that gives you
enlightenment, how are you going
to enlighten other people who
might be different from you?
>>The Kundalini is the
enlightened energy within you,
waiting to be awakened.
The search that spanned the
centuries and covered the earth
eventually centered around inner
alchemy, and the attainment
of immortality through the
activation of a hidden power
known as Kundalini.
Kundalini is a dormant,
enlightened energy
which resides within the
lower torso of the human body
and is activated through
yogic practice or meditation
and results in enlightenment,
inner illumination
and immortality.
Many of the legendary
figures of antiquity,
including Buddha and Jesus, were
successful spiritual alchemists
who believed in the spark of
light within human beings.
Jesus confirmed this when
he said, "the Kingdom of God
is within you."
When Buddha spoke of the
middle path to achieve nirvana,
he may have been describing
the central channel
of the body through which
the Kundalini energy travels.
China, India and Tibet
are all civilizations
which are based on the complete
evolution of consciousness
being achieved through
a Kundalini activation.
A Kundalini activation,
particularly
if achieved through the
practice of sexual yoga,
represented the ultimate threat
to the religious establishment
because it enabled
the human being
to achieve enlightenment
which freed
their person from the control
of the religious authority
of the time.
The Philosopher's
Stone was linked
with magic and with
early religions,
and was greatly
feared by the church
because it linked human
sexuality, or sexual yoga,
with higher consciousness
or enlightenment.
The basic theory of
the Philosopher's Stone
is in the process of being
rediscovered by science
because it represents the
reality of the ability
of the individual to unite
the energy of the body
with the energy of the universe.
In the hermetic
tradition of alchemy,
this was called
"squaring the circle."
>>People have
striven for centuries
to find out about
how to get back
to their primordial energy.
Some people have,
of course, clicked
into those states,
almost spontaneously,
and have been astonished
at what's possible,
and then have tried to find
ways to get us all, or least
sudden disciples, to move
into those patterns of energy,
those patterns of
the body-mind complex
that are for most people
even hard to conceive of.
>>There are descriptions of
the power of the Kundalini
experience in the esoteric
teachings of China, India,
Tibet, Egypt, Africa
and the Americas.
The Kundalini has been
described in the Bible
as the solar principal
in man, and is the basis
of the secret teachings
of Gnostic Christianity,
the Kabbalah, and the
hermetic tradition of alchemy.
In the I Ching, "The
Book of Changes,"
the oldest sacred
text of China, it
is called the "original spirit."
In the east, the Philosopher's
Stone, or Buddha hood,
is a complete
Kundalini activation
in which the meditator sees
a golden, embryonic version
of himself at the
time of enlightenment.
This genetic blueprint,
which is created
at the time of a
person's conception,
is dormant in the lower torso
until it is fully awakened
by activating the original chi.
When you successfully cultivate
the original chi of your body
and fully open the
energy meridians,
your own chi unites with
the chi of the universe.
Can you hold the body and spirit
as one, concentrating your chi
and becoming pliant?
Can you become like a newborn
baby, clearing your mind
and contemplating the profound?
Can you remain unknown?
In understanding all things,
can you remain detached?
In Indian yoga
scriptures, the Kundalini
was illustrated as a golden
serpent coiled within the body
to describe the potential power
of its energy and awakening.
And the serpent
swallowing its tail
is the oldest known symbol
of alchemical knowledge.
You have the potential
to achieve Buddha hood.
You can become enlightened.
You can discover your true power
if you fully open the energy
meridians of the body.
When you see your original
face, when you fully
activate the Kundalini
within your body,
this has been described
as union with God
in all the theistic traditions.
True success in
activating the Kundalini
is dependent on
finding the secret
of the real spiritual
gold within yourself
through meditation and other
mental and physical practices.
Kundalini yoga theory
is based on the concept
that there is a
tremendous reservoir
of stored energy within the
lower torso of the body.
When this energy is fully
activated and raised
to the top of the
head, it results
in enlightenment or immortality,
and this is the most
ancient secret of yoga.
What many alchemists
throughout the world
have called the
legendary golden elixir
is actually the fully activated
starting point of the body.
In its most complete form,
it is the realization
of Buddhahood, or the
attainment of immortality,
which results in permanent,
deathless consciousness.
It is this recreation
of conception
that has the potential to
transform a normal person
into a fully enlightened
being that has transcended
birth, death, space and time.
Buddha succeeded in awakening
the Kundalini energy
within himself.
At that moment, he
saw his original face
dissolve into emptiness.
From this golden vision, he
created the basic philosophy
of spiritual freedom that
has benefited humanity
throughout the world
for thousands of years.
The word Buddha means "awake."
When asked are you
a man or a god,
the Buddha is said to have
replied, "I am awake."
The ancient Chinese
medical system
describes the starting point
of the body as a spark of light
from the beginning of time.
It is midway between your
navel and your spine.
It exists within
everyone, and is created
at the time of conception.
This point of light has been
described as the face of God,
and alchemists called
it "the prima materia,"
the first matter.
>>Milarepa has a great line
in one of his teachings.
Milarepa was this Tibetan
master that I wrote
my doctoral dissertation about.
He appeared to me once,
too, by the way, in a dream.
He says, the best
realization of openness
is right in the center of
your body, in the avadhuti,
in the central channel.
This means that all of those
energies of the Bindus,
the elements of consciousness
moving through your body,
should move into
that open space.
And what seems to be a confined
place around the heart chakra
is actually the place where
the whole universe opens out
to realization,
to enlightenment.
So all of the
things that we talk
about, the Bindus, the
channels, the drops, all
of that kind of stuff,
these esoteric teachings
about the subtle
body, you might say
are accompanying
subtle body that goes
with this gross material body.
Working with those
energies allows
you to loosen up the entire
physical, electronic, chemical
and mental aspects
of the human person.
This is no joke.
How does a Milarepa become
the model of a civilization?
And of course, what we've
been talking about here
is the fully
awakened, enlightened,
the fully realized
Buddha is the model.
And so a person like
Milarepa who did
become a fully awakened,
enlightened Buddha,
was totally available to people
and animals and phenomena
throughout the universe.
That is the ideal.
That is the archetype.
That is the model for
whatever you're doing.
So that whatever
you're doing, even
if it is building
a principality,
as in fact Milarepa's
guru, Marpa, did,
he built himself a principality.
But while he was building
the principality,
he developed himself
as a Buddha as well.
And he handed out
to Milarepa who
in a different form, in
the form of a hermit,
in the form of an ascetic,
also manifested the same Buddha
nature.
So that suddenly
becomes the basis out
of which you can leave
an entire civilization.
And that is the thing that
I think we're missing.
We're missing the
civilization that
emerges out of the cave where
a person goes to meditate.
Out of the hermitage
where a person
discovers the fullness
of being itself
through spiritual practice.
What's the natural state?
The natural state is
this complete openness
so that your mind and body are
completely open to something
much greater than what
we are, and yet is not
separate from what we are.
It's one of those things
that goes beyond words.
But once you've seen
it and once you've
touched human beings who
live that all the time,
you'll never forget it.
>>Am I a man dreaming
I am a butterfly,
or am I a butterfly
dreaming I am a man?
One of the most ancient
Tibetan spiritual practices
is called Dream Yoga.
Dream Yoga is known to be
one of the primary practices
of the legendary
Six Yogas of Naropa.
Imagine as you are watching
right now that you are actually
dreaming.
What is it that makes you think
that you are awake right now?
How can you be certain
if you are dreaming
or if you are awake?
What is you learn to
control your own dreams?
You can do this
with the practice
of Dream Yoga, an
ancient method used
by Mahasiddhas and immortals.
Dreams can be so powerful that
they can change the world.
Artists, writers,
scientists and inventors
have all been
inspired by dreams.
Solutions to complex
problems have
been made clear within dreams.
Dreams also occur outside
of three-dimensional space
and time and can
reveal the future.
Padmasambhava in
8th century Tibet
described a dream where he saw
a future time in which the iron
bird flies, and
horses run on wheels,
and the Tibetan people were
scattered around the Earth,
and the Dharma came to
the land of the red man.
He was clearly seeing
the world as it
became in the 20th century.
Many of the great
scientific discoveries
are the result of
parallel probable versions
of the scientists communicating
within dreams according
to the mini world's
interpretation of quantum
mechanics.
As you are watching
right now, there
are multiple, parallel,
probable and alternate versions
of yourself doing the same
thing, simultaneously,
in multiple dimensions.
To control the dreams
while you were dreaming
enables you to access creative
information that can completely
transform your
experience of reality.
And to have what
is known as elusive
dream is to understand
your waking life
is also a part of your
personal dreamscape.
During the course of the day,
it is necessary to ask yourself
repeatedly, is this a dream?
To discover your true self
while in elusive dream,
go to a mirror and embrace
the image of yourself
that you see there.
Elusive dreaming is a
metaphor for enlightenment.
To realize you are dreaming
while you are dreaming
represents the ability
of each human being
to realize that their own
perception is dreamlike,
and to achieve greater
and greater levels
of awakening through their
own spiritual practices.
One of the primary ways of
realizing that you are dreaming
while you are dreaming is
to recognize an incongruity
within the dream.
To realize that
you are flying, you
are walking on water,
that because you
are walking through
a wall, that this
means that this is a dream
because you could not possibly
be doing this in
three-dimensional reality.
The goal of dream yoga is to
discover who you really are.
So to see a golden embryonic
version of yourself
within your dreams through a
complete Kundalini activation
represents complete
self-discovery
and ultimate enlightenment.
>>Now there are certain
prayers and practices
also that the Tibetans give for
how to position your body when
you sleep so that the channel's
in the proper position,
so that you're
breathing properly.
Also, they give a number of
prayers that can be said.
And I say one of these
prayers from time
to time about being able
to see dreams as lucid,
and also to recognize the
awake state as dreamlike
in some ways, because
this way you see
through the patterns of energy.
It doesn't mean that
they're not there,
it means that you see through
them, you see their qualities
and the woven quality
of all phenomena.
>>It is the dream
of enlightenment
which makes achieving
immortality possible.
The deepest level of our dreams
has always been enlightenment.
>>That's a great blessing.
And these are the
kinds of things
that the Lamas, the
tradition of dream yoga
really is a wonderful
gift, because then you
can use your nocturnal
experience as part
of your practice.
And it goes right
along with what
I was saying about
everything being an oblation,
everything being an offering.
Because if you waste
your valuable sleep time,
you're losing several hours
of practice every day.
But if you turn sleep
into a practice,
then you're practicing
all the time.
And so your body at
all times is engaged
in some kind of spiritual
activity-- a pretty good thing.
>>To know other is wisdom,
but to master oneself
is enlightenment.
Those who conquer others
require great strength.
But to conquer oneself
requires true power.
You can enter the Tao
through the true mastery
of martial arts.
The traditional goal of
higher martial arts in China
has always been to
enter the Tao, which
is the achievement
of enlightenment.
Seeing your original
face was successfully
cultivating the spiritual
embryo which transforms you
into an immortal.
So traditionally, the
greatest martial artists
reached this ultimate
level in which
you unite the energy of the
body with the energy of the Tao
and actually become
a living Buddha.
The secret of martial arts
is a Kundalini activation
which results in the
enlightened warrior seeing
his original face and
achieving inner illumination.
The master martial
artist actually
unites the microcosm of
the body with a macrocosm
of the universe, and
in doing so discovers
the holographic
nature of reality.
This process unites the
mind of the individual
with the universal mind.
Bodhidharma, the
founder of Zen Buddhism,
is the most well known and
respected Buddhist teacher
in East Asia.
In the 5th century, he
traveled from India to China
to teach the monks of
the Shaolin temple.
It was there that he created
Shaolin martial arts,
a method of self-defense
which included
meditation and enlightenment.
Bodhidharma taught there
was no enlightenment
outside of the mind,
and that the mind
is enlightenment itself.
Enlightenment is not just
an awakening of the mind,
it is a physical
process as well.
Many of the greatest
teachers of wisdom
have activated the original
mind using the source
energy of their bodies.
This experience is called
seeing your original face,
or returning the
original spirit to void.
The Tao is based on the unity of
the essential triad of heaven,
earth and humanity.
The ideal of the
Shaolin temple is
to enter the way by mastering
meditation and chi cultivation
as well as martial arts.
The creation of Tai Chi is based
on the thousand-year-old story
in which the founder
Chang San-Feng observed
an epic battle between
a crane and a snake.
He watched intently as the bird
fiercely attacked the snake
again and again.
With each attempt of the
bird to kill the snake,
the serpent's agility,
yielding and flowing movements
enabled it to survive.
The crane used its
speed and mobility
to avoid the snake's
counter attacks,
and also remained unharmed.
Chang San-Feng is
also said to have
had a dream the following
night in which he
was visited by the legendary
God of War, Kuan Ti.
Kuan Ti taught him the methods
of celestial martial arts
and the alchemical secret
of the golden embryo.
Chang San-Feng
combined these lessons
with a style of fighting based
on the movements he observed
of the crane and the snake.
This method relies
upon internal power,
or chi, and is based
on the principal that
yielding overcomes aggression,
and softness overpowers
hardness.
Chang San-Feng called
it Tai Chi Chuan,
or "the supreme, ultimate fist."
The highest level
of martial arts
is based on the
enlightened warrior
seeing his original face
and successfully cultivating
the spiritual embryo.
This has the potential of
transforming an individual
into an immortal,
or a living Buddha.
Many of the greatest
Chinese martial artists
actually achieved this
level of enlightenment,
and use their incredible
skills and power
to protect and
benefit their people.
A major aspect of
Chinese martial arts
is the transformation of
your three inner treasures--
jing, chi and chen--
within the body.
Often translated as reproductive
energy, vital bodily energy
and mind and spirit, they
are the most important aspect
of internal power development.
Their complete
refinement results
in the spiritual embryo and
immortality, a permanent state
of enlightened
consciousness that
is not limited by the
physical body and even
exists after death.
Complete mastery of
the sword has always
been a metaphor
for enlightenment.
The true sword represents
the enlightened mind.
And the enlightened
mind represents
discovering who you truly are
by seeing your original face.
Mastery of the sword
is based on the concept
that it is possible
to enter the Tao
and realize compete inner
illumination by combining
meditation and qi cultivation
with a martial arts practice.
The legendary
alchemist and founder
of Tai Chi, Chang
San-Feng, said the Tao
is something miraculous.
It is empty and has no
form, yet it has an essence.
It is hard to
understand and exists
like a shadow or an echo.
No one knows why this is.
Great spiritual warriors have
attained the Tao in the past,
and it is transmitted
in the present
by mysterious and subtle ways.
The great Tao has the
power to transform
both the body and the spirit.
In this way, the
body is transformed,
united with spirit.
One who has attained this is
called a spiritual warrior.
The shen, or spirit, is
fluid and ever-changing
though its primal
substance is unchanging.
Once the warrior
has entered the Tao,
he no longer fears
birth or death.
In this way, the body is
the same as spirit or shen.
Once revealed, the spirit is
the same as qi, or vital energy.
This is how the warrior is able
to move through water or fire
without being harmed
and to cast no shadow,
whether in the
sunlight or moonlight.
At this point, whether to
remain in the body or not
is entirely up to you.
At this stage, there
is no difference
between being in the
world and being out of it.
If the body, being
material, can achieve
these levels of subtle
integration, how much more
so can the shen, or spirit,
reach even deeper and further.
It is said when the spirit and
body are united they become
the true body, because when the
body and spirit unite as one
they live forever.
However, there are differences
in the depth of power
the warrior may attain.
If his spiritual power
is deep and profound,
this will affect
his body as well.
If it is small and shallow,
it only affects the mind.
One whose body and spirit are
united is an immortal warrior.
While one whose mind only is
affected cannot escape death.
In this way, we see that the
Tao is difficult to master.
But if one can
fully enter the Tao,
he achieves what is
called "leaving no body."
The warrior hides his light and
conceals his brilliance-- this
is how one attains the Tao.
By stabilizing the spirit
and cultivating their chi,
they study the Tao
without ceasing.
When their spirit
merges with the Tao,
it is called "entering the Tao."
It is said that those
who enter the Tao
are themselves
absorbed by the Tao.
If people will
cultivate the Tao,
their bodies will be strong.
By cultivating the
Tao for a long time,
one can transform
substance to spirit,
refine their body into subtle
energy, and merge with the Tao.
Then their knowledge
is boundless,
and their physical
body is transcendent.
This is the power of the Tao.
>>Speaking for a moment
from the Tibetan,
or the tantric
point of view, it's
not enough just to fall in
love, to give yourself to family
life, to raise children.
There is another way
of seeing all of that.
Because as we know, family
life, raising children,
being responsible
for your family
can be a tremendous attachment.
And every spiritual tradition
has warnings about sex, family,
relatives, money, houses and
all of those other things
as becoming obstacles
on the spiritual path.
So it's almost as if by claiming
that sexuality in some way
is a way to get enlightenment
is like telling people go down
that road that's just full
of potholes, and boulders,
and stray pieces of
metal, and you're
going to attain enlightenment.
But the beauty of
the tantric system
is that it takes life
as it is and sees
something sacred,
something wise, something
liberating in the
potholes, and the iron
chunks, and the boulders,
and the broken roads,
and the earthquakes and
everything else that occur.
>>There is an ancient
tantric saying
that Buddhahood can be found
in the vagina of a woman.
One of the oldest methods of
fully activating the Kundalini
and recreating conception
within the body
is through the practice
of sexual yoga.
Many couples in
China, India and Tibet
have achieved enlightenment
together in this manner.
The central teaching in tantric
yoga is that all of life
is sacred, especially sexuality.
This is because tantrism
views the reproductive energy
of our body as being the
same inner energy that
powers our enlightenment.
The practitioner
of sexual tantra
attempts to use the
energy of conception
as an agent for awakening
and transcendence.
Complete awakening
results in a normal person
becoming a fully enlightened
and realized human being.
This enables the individual to
transcend birth, death, space
and time.
The Six Yogas of Naropa
is a classical collection
of techniques from India which
will result in Buddhahood
or complete enlightenment
when fully mastered.
Many of these methods
were transmitted
by Mahasiddhas who
are often couples
that achieved enlightenment
through the practice
of sexual yoga.
The famous saying
that Buddhahood
can be found in the
vagina of a woman
refers to an ancient
tradition of sexual yoga
that results in
complete awakening.
The full potential of activating
the original reproductive
energy of the human body
transforms a normal person
into an enlightened immortal.
Many of these lineages go
back to famous Mahasiddhas
like Padmasambhava.
Padmasambhava is known to have
said that more women than men
would achieve tantric
enlightenment because
of their devotion to practice.
>>The tantras are
sometimes revealed,
both the Hindu tantras
and the Buddhist
tantras, in exactly the
terms that you gave.
That enlightenment
is found inside,
or abiding within the
bhaga, within the womb,
within the vagina.
To open out to the state of
wholeness and completeness,
which we can call openness,
we can call sunyata,
we can call
emptiness, we can call
voidness-- there are many
ways of describing it.
I like the word
"openness," because it has
that quality of the unbounded.
So this vaginal
phenomenon is a way
of saying that at the same
time this experience is
completely open, completely
pleasurable, indeed
orgasmic, and luminous.
Those are the three
characteristics
of the enlightened state in
a Tibetan tantric system--
openness, luminosity
and pleasure.
And that is something
that we keep coming across
in text after text after text.
What is experience is that?
A person rediscovers
what you were
saying as the original face--
the original, primordial embryo
of who we are, the very
basis of our existence.
The tantras also
talk about the mother
and the son reuniting together.
The white drop and the
red drop joining together,
a symbol, of course,
of conception itself.
So that the imagery of
sexuality is in there
because that's part
of it and that's
key to a lot of
human experience.
But there's sexuality going
on in every cell of your body
right now.
The light of the
sun in your heart
through meditation and
then spontaneously forming
a conflagration in
every single cell
of your body, that
is the kind of thing
that we're talking about.
So that the joining of the
two sides of the double helix
of DNA inside the
nucleus in every cell
is living that sexual
bliss in every moment
as it produces the proteins
that keep you alive.
If you're a Buddha,
you see every particle
of time and matter
and energy continually
generating as it were in a
sexual, reproductive way, all
the phenomena of
existence at all times.
You're living a blissful,
highly energetic kind of life.
>>From a Tibetan
perspective, the difference
between Buddhas and
ordinary individuals
is merely a question
of diligent practice.
>>Tibetan teachers have
spoken with some reluctance
about sexual yoga.
In every case that I have
personally encountered,
it has always been about
something to do with families,
and really elite
families preserving
very special traditions
within that family,
within the customs and the
beliefs of that family.
>>Many traditions believe
that if the energy meridians
of the body are fully opened,
the individual will inevitably
achieve complete realization.
The Kundalini
experience activates
the starting point of
the body and results
in the ultimate realization
of a person's potential.
This is a discovery in
which the entire universe is
found to exist within the mind.
One of the most famous
sayings in Tibet
is, there can be no Mahamudra,
which is enlightenment,
without Karmamudra, sexual yoga.
Although the majority of
Buddhist monks are celibate,
the tradition of the
Mahasiddhas believe
that the Buddha may have
achieved enlightenment
through the practice
of sexual yoga.
Because Mahamudra, which
is complete enlightenment,
can only be achieved
through Karmamudra,
which is sexual yoga.
>>In other words, the apparent
peace and almost stasis
of a Buddha image
does not really
adequately reflect the dance
or phenomenon that is truly
at the heart of enlightenment.
>>The complete potential of
fully harnessing and activating
the original reproductive
or sexual energy of the body
is one in which the human
being transforms into a Buddha,
or an immortal.
The ability to activate
the Kundalini with sex
requires strict adherence
to precise techniques
combined with specialized
breathing methods.
The reason that Western couples
are not achieving enlightenment
through the practice
of sexual yoga
is that they are not aware
of the authentic methods
and they haven't activated
the pre-birth energy.
The energy of the body
between the time of conception
and birth within
everyone is enlightened
and is connected to
the void, or the Tao.
The goal of inner alchemical
practices that use sexual yoga
is to recreate conception
by uniting the yin
and yang subtle bodies.
Tantric Buddhahood transforms
a normal human being
into an enlightened immortal.
Ancient Chinese medicine
also use the transformation
of the reproductive
energy of the body
to enable an adept to
achieve immortality
through successful
inner alchemical
practice that use the complete
activation of the starting
point of the body.
This tradition goes
back to the time
of the Yellow Emperor who
is said to have created
the Chinese medical tradition.
In Tibet, the union of the
Trikaya, or three bodies,
using sexual yoga
is known to result
in tantric enlightenment.
These systems are
based on the concept
that the pre-birth energy of
the body, the energy system that
is created between the time
of conception and birth,
is enlightened and is
connected to the void, or Tao.
This energy lies dormant
in a normal person.
In many yogic systems,
the final process
that transforms a human
being into an immortal,
or living Buddha, is
a sexual yoga practice
that results in full
Kundalini activation.
The goal of all
these traditions is
to create the spiritual embryo,
or embryo of Buddhahood.
>>Of course, I'm talking in
some ways as a Christian,
and a Christian
loves everything.
God is love.
So if people are experiencing
a loving relationship
through sexuality, they're
going to be changed by that
and they're going to
attain enlightenment.
If you study with someone like
Namkhai Norbu, for example,
he'll make a very
clear distinction
between tantric methods
of attainment and Dzogchen
methods.
He'll even distinguish
Dzogchen, which sometimes
sounds like zen to some of us.
He'll distinguish it from zen.
So he'll notice
these things how.
Because he's been
through this stuff.
He knows that from his
own inner experience,
so he can make those
distinctions very clearly.
Those of us who are
not yet as highly
realized as Namkhai Norbu
are walking on thin ice
if we try to make too many
distinctions without rooting it
in our own inner experience.
>>In both China and
Tibet, it is well
known that the most advanced
spiritual practitioners leave
no bodies after
the time of death,
and this represents
the achievement
of whole body enlightenment.
Padmasambhava was a
legendary mahasiddha,
considered to be the
founder of Tibetan Buddhism.
The lineage that he
started in the 8th century
has a particular
phenomenon known
as the body of light
associated with it
in which, when the
meditator dies,
his physical body shrinks away
to nothing within a few days.
Practitioners of the primordial
yoga system originally
transmitted by
Padmasambhava continue
to experience the
post-mortem dissolution
of the body in modern times.
Ramalinga in India,
Jesus of Nazareth,
and the Yellow Emperor
in China are all
believed to have left no
bodies upon their deaths.
Enlightenment
without remainder may
be the basis of ascension
stories throughout history.
Chinese legends say when a great
master achieves immortality,
he casts no shadow, he appears
and disappears at will,
and ascends to heaven
in broad daylight.
>>One of the things that happens
when a great teacher dies
is that there are often
phenomena-- things that
impress their disciples as
to the degree of holiness
in that person.
And so in some of the
Tibetan traditions
there is a phenomenon that
is called "the rainbow
body," in which the
body of the deceased
manifests light
phenomena after death.
Often, it takes the form
of rainbows in the sky.
You're talking
about the body that
begins to dissolve its
material substance into light.
>>In 1998, an often
repeated story
emerged once again from a
village in the remote Kham
region of Eastern Tibet.
It is said that a
rainbow appeared
one day above the cabin of
Khenpo Achos, a devout Lama who
had continued to practice
and teach Buddhism
despite the severe restrictions
of the Chinese government.
He was in his 80s, but not sick.
Nevertheless, he
laid down on his bed,
began reciting the Tibetan
mantra om mani padme hum,
and died.
Shortly after, the nuns, monks
and others who studied with him
began the Tibetan Buddhist
prayers that accompany death.
They noticed that
Khenpo Achos' skin
began to turn soft and pinkish.
His students hurried to
another Lama to ask about this,
and he told them
to cover the body
and continue their prayers.
They placed a thin, yellow
monk's cloak over him,
and as the days passed, they
saw his body was shrinking.
By the end of the week,
the students reported,
nothing remained.
Khenpo Achos had
apparently become
what is known in Tibetan
Buddhism as a "rainbow body."
The story spread through
Buddhist circles.
Many realized that the
miraculous event had
implications for Christianity.
They believed if
we can establish
as an anthropological
fact that what
is described in the
Resurrection of Jesus
had not only happened to
others but is happening today,
it would put our view
of human potential
in a completely different light.
>>Even if we were to
think of it as ultimately
explainable by some form
of physics that has not yet
been devised or something
in quantum physics,
we can give all kinds
of explanations.
But certainly, it's a
paranormal phenomenon.
It's not something
that happens every day,
and it does seem to
have a connection
to spiritual practice.
>>In China, many great
sages and alchemists
are also said to have left
empty graves after death.
In Asia, the highest
level of meditation
has always been known
as enlightenment
without remainder, in
which the physical body has
dissolved into pure energy.
>>To the point where their
body and mind are engaged
in spiritual practice and
mystical illumination,
habitually, every
microsecond of the day,
it is highly likely that
their body/mind complex
will do unusual things
at the point of death.
Whether that means preserving
the body from decay,
as occurs in the
incorruptible saints,
whether it's a
manifestation of stigmata,
manifestation of other
internal symbols on the bones
or organs of the
body, as has been
seen in some Catholic
saints, or whether it's
going to be these phenomena
of dissolution, shrinkage,
or complete
disappearance, it all
depends on how that person has
engaged with spiritual practice
such that everything that
you are is in the process,
in the practice.
And I think that that's
what this is all about.
That spiritual
practice is really
about a total engagement of
every last atom in your body.
>>The goal of life is to
discover who we really.
At the highest level
of meditation and yoga
we see our original
face, and this
enables us to enter the
Tao and fully discover
who we have always really been.
>>What we're talking about,
in terms of spirituality,
in terms of the body, in
terms of enlightenment,
is we're making the
claim, along with all
the great historical traditions,
that there's something
more that we are already.
There's something more that
we can realize in our bodies
cannot be restricted merely to
a vast complex of desires which
will come to an end
with our last breath.
Khenpo Achos, this Tibetan monk,
out in his little Hermitage
in Eastern Tibet, breathing
his last with the words
om mani padme hum
and then dying.
And then his face turns into
the face of a little child,
pink and more alive than
the 81-year-old man who
said his final mantra.
>>Om mani padme hum, om mani
padme hum, om mani padme hum.
>>There is something
formed in chaos coming
before heaven and
earth, existing
in the silent and tranquil void.
It stands alone and unchanging.
It pervades everywhere
without becoming exhausted.
It is the mother of
heaven and earth.
I do not know its name,
and so call it Tao.
The future of modern
science is to discover
the mind of the Tao.
As science studies
meditation and the evolution
of consciousness,
the basic unification
of Eastern and Western
paradigms of the evolution
of consciousness is inevitable.
Modern science
will become focused
on enabling human
beings to achieve
their complete potential,
which is enlightenment.
Scientists will realize that the
completion stage of meditation
is the primordial vision
of the original face.
This represents
the ultimate level
of human mind/body evolution.
>>There are hints, there are
suggestions, that things go on
in the human body/mind complex
that have not been completely
explained by science, by
technology, by psychotherapy,
by quantum physics, or whatever.
So I think we're just being
invited to explore more deeply.
We may actually come up with
a new theory, a new paradigm.
>>Darwin's Theory of Evolution
does not include the fact
that the human reproductive
system is perfectly
designed to achieve
enlightenment,
and that this is actually
the purpose of the evolution
of consciousness.
Evolutionary psychology
is based on the idea
that all human behavior
is merely an attempt
to reproduce sexually.
The problem with this is that
it leaves out the basic fact
that the human reproductive
system is perfectly
designed to achieve
enlightenment
by unifying the pre-birth and
post-birth chi of the body.
This is the basis of the
Chinese medical system,
and represents the
future of science
in the 21st century as
the Philosopher's Stone is
rediscovered.
>>It shows that the
human body is a device
that the universe
itself has generated
enabling that enlightenment
to burst upon the scene.
In other words, your body,
with all its aches and pains,
and some people
tell us we weren't
meant to stand up on
two legs, and a lot
of problems that
have come into play
because of the shape of our
body and the way the organs
are set up.
But if you look at it from
a Buddhist point of view,
your body is set up so that the
energy goes from the perineum,
from the crotch, from
the base of the spine,
up through the subtle body
and the material body, both
in intimate union so that it
gets to the top of your head
and beyond so that you
can attain enlightenment.
If you were a
monkey or a dog, you
have some of those
same structures,
but they're not
positioned in such a way
to favor the attainment
of enlightenment.
So that you're sitting
in meditation in accord
with a certain set of
points that highlight,
accentuate and enhance
the inherent properties
of the human body to
attain enlightenment.
So this is a little
machine we've
been given for attaining that
high degree of consciousness.
This is magnificent stuff.
Because then you
suddenly realize,
oh, even if we did evolve from
so-called lower forms of life,
we are also in continuity
with those forms of life such
that what we attain is not just
private property, but is good,
cosmic benefit.
And then you get immediately
into the whole Bodhisattva vow,
the idea of doing this for the
sake of all sentient beings.
>>There is an ancient
story from China
in which a famous
zen master told
his student, if you see the
Buddha on the road, kill him.
What is meant by this
story is that your idea
of the Buddha as a sacred
figure to be worshipped
is incorrect, and is an illusion
that actually is blocking
your own perception of your
own awareness as enlightenment,
and your own realization
that you yourself have always
been a living Buddha.
The fully activated
starting point of the body
is your original face.
>>The Dalai Lama
says very clearly
how no self, Buddhist teaching
on no self and all of that,
is not about the destruction
of the personality.
It's a transformative
process that
has to do with who you
really are comes to the fore,
and what you are not disappears.
>>Buddhahood, immortality
or enlightenment actually
represent the true potential
of each human being
to fully awaken.
This is inevitably
going to be the goal
of the evolution
of consciousness
in the 21st century.
We are at the edge of time
when achieving enlightenment
will become a phenomenon
recognized by Western science
as both the completion
stage of meditation
and the achievement of matter,
energy and consciousness
unification.
When enough individuals
have activated the Kundalini
and seen their original
face within themselves,
the human race will be
completely transformed.
Already today,
millions of people
practice yoga, meditation,
Tai Chi and Qigong.
The complete evolution
of consciousness
is the result of these mind/body
arts when fully mastered.
The goal of our existence is
to reach our ultimate potential
as fully enlightened beings.
Bodhidharma said, our
original face is the mind.
The mind is our original face.
This mind is the same as
the mind of all Buddhas.
Buddhas of the past and future
merely transmit this mind.
Beyond your mind, there
is no Buddha anywhere,
but confused people don't
realize that their own mind is
the Buddha.
They keep searching for
truth outside of themselves.
Don't become lost
in such illusions.
Just realize that
there is no Buddha
outside of your own mind.
Wherever you are,
there is a Buddha.
Your mind has always
been a living Buddha.
So if you see a
Buddha on the road,
there is no need for
reverence-- just kill him,
because it is a false illusion.
If people will
cultivate the Tao,
their bodies will be strong.
By cultivating the
Tao for a long time,
one can transform
substance to spirit,
refining their body into subtle
energy and merge with the Tao.
Then their knowledge
is boundless,
and their physical
body is transcended.
This is the power of the Tao.
Speaking without speaking
and moving without moving
is called "the profound
and secret virtue."
You look at it and
it is not seen.
It is called "the formless."
You listen to it
and it is not heard,
it is called "the soundless."
You grasp it and
it cannot be held.
It is called "the intangible."
The ancient sages were
masters at penetrating
the subtle and profound Tao.
Can you hold the body
and spirit as one?
Concentrating your chi
and becoming pliant,
can you become like
a newborn baby?
Clearing your mind and
contemplating the profound,
can you remain unknown?
In understanding all things,
can you remain detached?
The highest enlightenment
is like water.
Water benefits all beings,
yet argues with no one.
It flows in unknown
places, and in this way
is close to the Tao.
Because the enlightened
do not go against nature,
they are one with the Tao.
The Tao that can
be put into words
is not the true and eternal Tao.
The Tao is an empty vessel-- it
is used, but never exhausted.
It is the fathomless
source of everything.
Under heaven, there is
nothing more yielding
and soft as water--
yet for attacking
what is hard and rigid,
there is nothing better.
In this way, the weak
can vanquish the strong
and the soft can
overcome the hard.
People follow the way of earth.
Earth follows the way of heaven.
Heaven follows the way of Tao.
Tao follows its own natural way.
There is something
formed in chaos coming
before heaven and
earth, existing
in the silent and tranquil void.
It stands alone and unchanging.
It pervades everywhere
without becoming exhausted.
It is the mother of
heaven and earth.
I do not know its name,
and so call it Tao.
To know others is
wisdom, but to master
one's self in enlightenment.
Those who conquer others
require great strength.
But to conquer one's
self requires true power.